Let's discuss how minimizing the terms in the objective function
serves a similar purpose as some commonly used constraints.
The parts of the objective function that we've seen before are
the portfolio's risk explained by the factors called the common risk.
There's the specific risk of the portfolio
that's due to individual assets in the portfolio.
There's also the expected portfolio return.
The transaction costs term is the cost due to trading.
First, there's the market neutral constraint that the sum of the holdings is zero.
In other words, the sum of long positions equals the sum of short positions.
When the optimizer minimizes the common risk that's due to the risk factors,
it is also adjusting the holdings in order to
reduce the imbalance between longs and shorts.
Remember that market risk is also a factor.
So the way an optimization can reduce exposure
to the market is by being close to dollar neutral.
So this has a similar effect as the hard constraint that
requires the sum of holdings to be exactly zero.
Next, let's think about constraining the risk due to large positions.
The leverage constraint limits the maximum of the absolute values
to below a certain threshold in order to limit this position size risk.
If we look at the objective function,
the risk aversion parameter in
the objective function sets the total dollar risk of the portfolio.
This means that the risk aversion parameter helps to control the portfolio size,
which is the gross market value or sum of the magnitudes of the holdings.
Now, let's think about the constraint that attempts to diversify the portfolio
by setting a limit on the maximum holding on any single asset.
Can you think of which terms in the objective function may serve a similar purpose?
Notice that we have a term for a specific risk,
also called idiosyncratic risk.
This is the risk that is specific to each individual asset.
When the optimizer attempts to minimize the specific risk,
this also serves to diversify the portfolio by
limiting the portfolio's exposure to any single asset.
In other words, minimizing the specific risk helps to keep
the holding on any single asset from getting too large.
Note that the transaction cost term would limit
the speed at which a concentrated position would be built,
but would not prevent that holding from increasing over time.